[DOC-1044] Gen-AI applications page updates (#29739)
yugabyte/yugabyte-db: docs/content/stable/explore/gen-ai-apps.md

---
title: Building Gen-AI applications on top of YugabyteDB
headerTitle: Gen-AI applications
linkTitle: Gen-AI apps
headcontent: Build scalable and resilient AI applications with YugabyteDB
menu:
  stable:
    identifier: explore-gen-ai
    parent: explore
    weight: 110

> aliases:

Reviewer: Would hide h4s

- Flexible vector indexing: Run YugabyteDB on any infrastructure (self-hosted or cloud) with full PostgreSQL tool compatibility (for example, pg_dump, ORMs like SQLAlchemy). Internally, YugabyteDB uses a pluggable and swappable vector indexing framework. While it currently leverages USearch for high-performance vector search, the architecture is designed to be "algorithm-agnostic." This allows other leading libraries (such as hnswlib or FAISS) to be seamlessly integrated as the AI landscape evolves.

### Unified data sources

AI applications require access to massive volumes of unstructured and diverse data (text, audio, video, and images) stored across fragmented locations like cloud buckets, local disks, and external applications. So it is a significant challenge to either get this diverse source data into YugabyteDB, or allowing YugabyteDB to access this data in its original location.

YugabyteDB unifies data access access by leveraging the PostgreSQL ecosystem:

> - Native data access: Using built-in PostgreSQL capabilities and extensions, YugabyteDB can access (and optionally import) data in its native format, ranging from unstructured files (PDF, DOCX, MPEG) to structured formats (CSV, Apache Iceberg), directly from local storage or cloud buckets (such as, S3, GCS).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Native data access: Using built-in PostgreSQL capabilities and extensions, YugabyteDB can access (and optionally import) data in its native format, ranging from unstructured files (PDF, DOCX, MPEG) to structured formats (CSV, Apache Iceberg), directly from local storage or cloud buckets (such as S3 or GCS).
```

> - Foreign Data Wrappers (FDW): YugabyteDB allows access to other databases via PostgreSQL Foreign Data Wrappers (FDW), using which you can query remote databases as if they were local tables. For example, you can query an S3 Bucket via FDW:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Foreign Data Wrappers (FDW): YugabyteDB allows access to other databases via PostgreSQL FDWs, which you can use to query remote databases as if they were local tables. For example, you can query an S3 Bucket via FDW:
```

---
title: Building Gen-AI applications on top of YugabyteDB
headerTitle: Gen-AI applications
linkTitle: Gen-AI apps
headcontent: Build scalable and resilient AI applications with YugabyteDB
menu:
  stable:
    identifier: explore-gen-ai
    parent: explore
    weight: 110
aliases:
  - /stable/explore/going-beyond-sql/gen-ai-apps/
type: docs
---

Generative AI has transformed how applications interact with data. While early adoption focused on text-based chatbots, modern AI applications have evolved into multimodal systems capable of processing text, audio, and video to deliver actionable insights.

YugabyteDB provides the scalable, distributed data foundation required to run modern AI workloads, from simple chatbots to complex agentic workflows. By combining the familiarity of PostgreSQL with distributed scalability, you can store and query billions of vector embeddings without managing complex, separate infrastructure.

> 

Reviewer 2: Lets put a link to https://www.yugabyte.com/blog/benchmarking-1-billion-vectors-in-yugabytedb/

## Key concepts

### Retrieval-augmented generation

Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) is the framework used to provide large language models (LLMs) with access to your private, real-time data. Instead of relying solely on the LLM's pre-trained knowledge, a RAG-based application:

1. Retrieves relevant context from a vector database (like YugabyteDB).
1. Passes that context to the LLM along with the user's prompt.
1. Generates a response that's accurate, up-to-date, and grounded in your specific data.

### Vectors and embeddings

> In AI, data is often represented as vectors (or embeddings). These are long lists of numbers that capture the meaning of a piece of data. To make your data understandable to an AI:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In AI, data is often represented as vectors (or embeddings). These are long lists of numbers that capture the semantic meaning of a piece of data. To make your data understandable to an AI:
```

1. Analyze: Generate insights, visualizations, and summaries directly from your data without writing custom code.

MCP complements RAG by providing direct access to structured relational data, while RAG excels at semantic search across unstructured content. Together, they enable comprehensive AI applications that can both find similar content (via vectors) and answer precise questions about your structured data (via MCP).

## AI use cases

You aren't limited to building chatbots. AI on YugabyteDB is used for a wide range of enterprise use cases:

- Summarization: Condense long documents or call transcripts into actionable summaries.
- Recommendation: Use vector similarity to suggest products, content, or services based on user behavior.
- Analysis: Detect patterns and anomalies in large datasets, such as fraud detection or sentiment analysis.
- Personalization: Tailor user experiences by matching real-time activity with historical preferences.

## YugabyteDB for AI

YugabyteDB serves as a **modern and flexible platform for AI** by providing a comprehensive foundation to build production-ready AI applications.

### Open standards, flexible foundation

> YugabyteDB uses the PostgreSQL pgvector extension for vector storage and search, so you can work with embeddings from any model or source.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
YugabyteDB combines the PostgreSQL pgvector extension APIs with Vector LSM, a scalable, distributed, high throughput vector store, so you can work with embeddings from any model or source.
```

And link to https://www.yugabyte.com/blog/yugabytedb-vector-indexing-architecture/
